<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Engels is applying here the word labor in its old usage in place of labor power. In later years Engels and Marx always put labor power in places where labor was used in this sense before.</p>
					<p>“In order to be able to extract value from the consumption of a commodity, our friend, Moneybags, must be so lucky as to find, within the sphere of circulation, in the market, a commodity, whose use-value possesses the peculiar property of being a source of value, whose actual consumption, therefore, is itself an embodiment of labor, and, consequently, a creation of value. The possessor of money does find on the market such a special commodity in capacity for labor or labor power.” Marx: Capital, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 1, <abbr>p.</abbr> 186.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="principles-of-communism.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Manufacture is used here in a now obsolete sense meaning production by hand (Latin: <i xml:lang="la">manus</i>⁠—hand and <i xml:lang="la">facio</i>⁠—make.) Manufacture was the first form of industrialization of production In the pre-machine age, the organization of production by hand on a large scale as against individual production under the guild system. Manufacture was the forerunner of modern machine industry. Wherever used in this document the word has this meaning.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="principles-of-communism.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
					</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The indispensable minimum of subsistence mentioned here is not the absolute minimum on which a worker can keep alive. The minimum cited here as the determining factor of the value of labor power includes also such things as would be considered luxuries in a backward country but are self-understood necessities in a highly developed country. Thus the value of the commodity, labor power, varies in the different countries.</p>
					<p>Marx says about this in “Capital” <abbr>Vol.</abbr> 1, Chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>:</p>
					<p>“If the owner of labor-power works today, tomorrow he must again be able to repeat the same process in the same conditions as regards health and strength. His means of subsistence must therefore be sufficient to maintain him in his normal state as a laboring individual. His natural wants, such as food, clothing, fuel, and housing, vary according to the climate and other physical conditions of his country. On the other hand, the number and extent of his so-called necessary wants, as also the modes of satisfying them, are themselves the product of historical development, and depend therefore to a great extent on the conditions under which, and consequently on the habits and degree of comfort in which, the class of free laborers has been formed. In contradistinction therefore to the case of other commodities, there enters into the determination of the value of labor-power, a historical and moral element.”</p>
					<p>
						<a href="principles-of-communism.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Answer to question 9.</p>
					<p>The journeyman of the guildmaster was, as a rule, the apprentice of yesterday and the master of tomorrow, while the modern proletarian is, as a rule, a wage worker for life. The journeyman of the artisan lived as a part of the family of the latter and was part of the same social strata, while the proletarian is divided from his employer by a social chasm which removes him, in education, in mode of living, <abbr>etc.</abbr> a whole world from the capitalist. The journeyman of the artisan worked with tools that were his property, or, at least, easily became his property: the proletarian manipulates a machine, not his own and beyond his power to buy⁠—firstly, because he lacks the necessary means, and, secondly, the machine is practically useless except as a part of a whole system of machines that make up the factory and permit the production of a commodity only by their common or successive use. The journeyman of the independent artisan was an artisan himself; the quality of his product dependent on his skill; the modern proletarian is a machine hand: the quality of his product depends mostly on the machine while he is responsible for the quantity. The journeyman and his master, the guild burgher, were protected against competition by monopolistic guild charters: the proletarian of today is a plaything of competition. The journeyman and his guildmaster were reactionary and resisted economic progress because it destroyed their idyllic monopolist existence; the proletarian of today welcomes and assists economic progress because his final emancipation is dependent on the furtherest possible development of all the productive forces of society.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="principles-of-communism.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bourgeois democracy made its bow to society with a very limited suffrage. Voting was a privilege of the propertied classes. A change has taken place slowly. Since Engels wrote this manuscript, bourgeois democracy has undergone a gradual change in outward form. With education, the press and pulpit under its absolute control, capitalism could entrust the masses with the right to vote. Occasional interference in the calculations of the ruling groups by uncontrollable moods of the voters is met with little correctives such as graft and corruption. A system of checks and balances is a protection against any undesirable sudden political changes. And against any danger of a serious political revolt there always remains, for a corrective, the police and military power of the state. Thus it is not only the limitation of the suffrage to the bourgeoisie which assures unrestricted and unqualified political control to that class.</p>
					<p>However, at the time when Engels wrote this document the question of extension of suffrage was a revolutionary demand of large masses in France and England. It was for this reason that the author of the “Principles” emphasized the importance of limited suffrage for bourgeois control of the state.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="principles-of-communism.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The right of parliaments to grant taxes is the foundation of tremendous power, even in a pseudo constitutional monarchy, such as Germany was before the world war. The dependency of the government on parliament for its only steadily yielding source of income, taxes and tariffs, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, forces even the semi-feudal monarchy into the role of a servant to the bourgeoisie. The monarch claiming to rule by the grace of God sinks into the position of a lackey of capitalism, reigning by the grace of the bourgeoisie.</p>
					<p>Capitalism, however, at the same time, changes the economic basis of the old nobility and thus turns it into a subdivision of the modern capitalist class representing mostly agrarian capital.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="principles-of-communism.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Engels wrote this manuscript on the eve of a revolutionary upheaval, the shadow of which was visible to his keen eyes even then. His enthusiastic welcome for the coming event was caused in the main by his conviction that a new revolution, in France for instance, could make its appearance only as a proletarian revolution. Even in backward Germany the national revolution then due, could, in his eyes, only complete its task of creating a democratic national state. With this accomplished, the bourgeois revolution would have dug its own grave into which it would be pushed unceremoniously by its energetic successor, the proletarian revolution. Marx shared these expectations.</p>
					<p>This optimistic hope was not well founded. Engels himself wrote about this view a half century later:</p>
					<p>“History proved us and all those that thought like we did to have been incorrect. It has made clear that the stage of economic development on the continent was by far, not ripe at that time for the elimination of capitalist production. It has proven this by the economic revolution which since 1848, has taken hold of the whole continent and has only since then granted real citizenship to big industry in France, Austria, Hungary, Poland and lately also Russia, and which has made Germany absolutely an industrial country of the first order⁠—all on a capitalist basis which in 1848 surely was still able to expand very much. It is just this industrial revolution that has brought clarity into the relation of the classes; which has eliminated a great number of intermediary groups that have come over from the manufacturing period and, in Eastern Europe, even from the artisans; which has created a real bourgeoisie and a real proletariat and has pushed these classes into the foreground of the stage of social development. It is by this process that the struggles between these two great classes, which in 1848 existed, outside of England, only in Paris, and at best in a few big industrial centers, has been spread all over Europe and has taken on an intensity which was unthinkable in 1848. Then, the many sectarian ‘gospels’ with thelr panaceas⁠—today, the generally accepted, transparently clear, and its last aim clearly defining theory of Marx. Then, the masses divided into, and differing by, localities and nationalities, thrown back and forth between enthusiasm and despair⁠—today, a great international army of communists⁠—marching onward irresistibly growing daily in numbers, in organization, in discipline, in understanding and in its conviction of victory.”</p>
					<p>
						<a href="principles-of-communism.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Engels never entertained any illusions about the possibilities of a peaceful revolution. In the foreword to “Civil Wars in France,” Engels says: “The working class cannot confine itself to taking possession of a ready made governmental state machinery and setting it going for its own ends.” Or as Marx puts it: “The proletarian revolution has not to transmit the military and bureaucratic machinery from one hand to another as has been done up to the present, but must break it.”</p>
					<p>If in spite of that, Engels does not deny categorically all chances of a peaceful revolution it is because he did not want to frighten unnecessarily his newly won adherents of the Paris club. Although they had dethroned their leaders, who were moved by illusions rather than by knowledge, they had not yet dethroned their own illusions. Engels therefore presents armed conflicts as an historic probability declaring the communists to meet the emergency when it arises. Thus he did justice to his convictions and yet did not frighten his new friends beyond the boundary lines of his influence.</p>
					<p>In the Manifesto the two friends did no longer make such concessions. There they say:</p>
					<p>“The communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly declare that thelr ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of all existing social conditions. Let the ruling classes tremble at a communistic revolution. The proletarians have nothing to lose but thelr chains. They have a world to win.</p>
					<p>“Working men of all countries, unite!”</p>
					<p>
						<a href="principles-of-communism.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The paragraph abruptly ends in the original work. This uncited endnote probably goes here:</p>
					<p>“Comparing the draft of Engels with the final form of the Manifesto, it will be noted that the Manifesto proposes more radical measures than the draft. The draft suggests limitation of inheritance, the Manifesto demands abolition: the draft proposes expropriation of land gradually and for compensation, the Manifesto demands immediate and complete expropriation without compensation. Public organization of work and erection of palaces of labor has been dropped entirely by the Manifesto.</p>
					<p>“Engels was influenced in some of his immediate demands by existing tendencies in France, by Louis Blanc and others.</p>
					<p>“For Engels, the demand for a democratic constitution did not express the form of proletarian rule but a condition permitting the organization of the proletariat for political struggle for the setting up of a proletarian dictatorship. Criticizing the name Social-Democrats in 1894, Engels said: ‘Social-Democrat⁠ ⁠… is inexact as a name for a party whose economic program is not simply a general socialist one, but definitely communist⁠—for a party whose political aim is the suppression of the state and, therefore, also democracy.”</p>
					<p>
						<a href="principles-of-communism.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Communist Manifesto answers this question as follows:</p>
					<p>“National differances, and antagonisms between peoples, are daily more and more vanishing, owing to the development of the bourgeoisie, to freedom of commerce, to the world-market, to uniformity in the mode of production and in the conditions of life corresponding thereto.</p>
					<p>“The supremacy of the proletariat will cause them to vanish still faster. United action, of the leading civilized countries at least, is one of the first conditions for the emancipation of the proletariat.</p>
					<p>“In proportion as the exploitation of one individual by another is put an end to, the exploitation of one nation by another will also be put an end to. In proportion as the antagonism between classes within the nation vanishes, the hostility of one nation to another will come to an end.”</p>
					<p>
						<a href="principles-of-communism.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>About religion and Communism we read in the Communist Manifesto:</p>
					<p>“Does it require deep intuition to comprehend that man’s ideas, views, and conceptions, in one word, man’s consciousness, changes with every change in the conditions of his material existence, in his social relations and in his social life?</p>
					<p>“What else does the history of ideas prove, than that intellectual production changes in character in proportion as material production is changed? The ruling ideas of each age have ever been the ideas of its ruling class.⁠ ⁠…</p>
					<p>“When the ancient world was in its last throes, the ancient religions were overcome by Christianity. When Christian ideas succumbed in the 18th century to rationalist ideas, feudal society fought its death-battle with the then revolutionary bourgeoisie. The ideas of religious liberty and freedom of conscience, merely gave expression to the sway of free competition within the domain of knowledge.⁠ ⁠…</p>
					<p>“The communist revolution is the most radical rupture with traditional property relations; no wonder that this development involves the most radical rupture with traditional ideas.”</p>
					<p>
						<a href="principles-of-communism.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>At the time when the “Principles” were written, there existed practically no proletarian parties anywhere. The political action of the incomparably small groups of communists had to connect up with the activities of existing progressive political groups. Although all these groups were more or less dominated by bourgeois ideology, even the most proletarian⁠—the Chartist movement in England, yet these groups were revolutionary. Engels made it clear, however, that the communists carry on independent politics from these movements and accompany them only so long as their roads may lay together.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="principles-of-communism.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Qual” is a philosophical play upon words. Qual literally means torture, a pain which drives to action of some kind; at the same time the mystic Böhme puts into the German word something of the meaning of the Latin <i xml:lang="la">qualitas</i>; his “qual” was the activating principle arising from, and promoting in its turn, the spontaneous development of the thing, relation, or person subject to it, in contradistinction to a pain inflicted from without.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="socialism.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p> Marx and Engels, “Die Heilige Familie,” Frankfurt a. M. 1845, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 201⁠–⁠204.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="socialism.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p> And even in business matters, the conceit of national Chauvinism is but a sorry adviser. Up to quite recently, the average English manufacturer considered it derogatory from an Englishman to speak any language but his own, and felt rather proud than otherwise of the fact that “poor devils” of foreigners settled in England and took off his hands the trouble of disposing of his products abroad. He never noticed that these foreigners, mostly Germans, thus got command of a very large part of British foreign trade, imports and exports, and that the direct foreign trade of Englishmen became limited, almost entirely, to the colonies, China, the United States, and South America. Nor did he notice that these Germans traded with other Germans abroad, who gradually organized a complete network of commercial colonies all over the world. But when Germany, about forty years ago, seriously began manufacturing for export, this network served her admirably in her transformation, in so short a time, from a corn-exporting into a first-rate manufacturing country. Then, about ten years ago, the British manufacturer got frightened, and asked his ambassadors and consuls how it was that he could no longer keep his customers together. The unanimous answer was: (1) You don’t learn your customer’s language but expect him to speak your own; (2) You don’t even try to suit your customer’s wants, habits, and tastes, but expect him to conform to your English ones.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="socialism.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p> This is the passage on the French Revolution: “Thought, the concept of law, all at once made itself felt, and against this the old scaffolding of wrong could make no stand. In this conception of law, therefore, a constitution has now been established, and henceforth everything must be based upon this. Since the sun had been in the firmament, and the planets circled round him, the sight had never been seen of man standing upon his head⁠—<i><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr></i>, on the Idea⁠—and building reality after this image. Anaxagoras first said that the Nous, reason, rules the world; but now, for the first time, had man come to recognize that the Idea must rule the mental reality. And this was a magnificent sunrise. All thinking Beings have participated in celebrating this holy day. A sublime emotion swayed men at that time, an enthusiasm of reason pervaded the world, as if now had come the reconciliation of the Divine Principle with the world.” [Hegel: “Philosophy of History,” 1840, <abbr>p.</abbr> 535.] Is it not high time to set the anti-socialist law in action against such teachings, subversive and to the common danger, by the late Professor Hegel?</p>
					<p>
						<a href="socialism.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p> From “The Revolution in Mind and Practice,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 21, a memorial addressed to all the “red Republicans, communists and socialists of Europe,” and sent to the provisional government of France, 1848, and also “to Queen Victoria and her responsible advisers.”</p>
					<p>
						<a href="socialism.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p> Note, l. c., <abbr>p.</abbr> 70.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="socialism.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p> It is hardly necessary in this connection to point out, that, even if the form of appropriation remains the same, the <i>character</i> of the appropriation is just as much revolutionized as production is by the changes described above. It is, of course, a very different matter whether I appropriate to myself my own product or that of another. Note in passing that wage-labor, which contains the whole capitalistic mode of production in embryo, is very ancient; in a sporadic, scattered form it existed for centuries alongside of slave-labor. But the embryo could duly develop into the capitalistic mode of production only when the necessary historical preconditions had been furnished.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="socialism.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>See Appendix.</i></p>
					<p>
						<a href="socialism.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p> “The Condition of the Working-Class in England” (Sonnenschein &amp; <abbr>Co.</abbr>), <abbr>p.</abbr> 84.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="socialism.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I say “have to.” For only when the means of production and distribution have <i>actually</i> outgrown the form of management by joint-stock companies, and when, therefore, the taking them over by the State has become <i>economically</i> inevitable, only then⁠—even if it is the State of today that effects this⁠—is there an economic advance, the attainment of another step preliminary to the taking over of all productive forces by society itself. But of late, since <span epub:type="z3998:surname">Bismarck</span> went in for State-ownership of industrial establishments, a kind of spurious socialism has arisen, degenerating, now and again, into something of flunkeyism, that without more ado declares <i>all</i> State-ownership, even of the Bismarckian sort, to be socialistic. Certainly, if the taking over by the State of the tobacco industry is socialistic, then Napoleon and Metternich must be numbered among the founders of socialism. If the Belgian State, for quite ordinary political and financial reasons, itself constructed its chief railway lines; if Bismarck, not under any economic compulsion, took over for the State the chief Prussian lines, simply to be the better able to have them in hand in case of war, to bring up the railway employees as voting cattle for the Government, and especially to create for himself a new source of income independent of parliamentary votes⁠—this was, in no sense, a socialistic measure, directly or indirectly, consciously or unconsciously. Otherwise, the Royal Maritime Company, the Royal porcelain manufacture, and even the regimental tailor of the army would also be socialistic institutions, or even, as was seriously proposed by a sly dog in Frederick William <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>.’s reign, the taking over by the State of the brothels.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="socialism.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A few figures may serve to give an approximate idea of the enormous expansive force of the modern means of production, even under capitalist pressure. According to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Giffen, the total wealth of Great Britain and Ireland amounted, in round numbers, in</p>
					<p>1814 to £2,200,000,000.</p>
					<p>1865 to £6,100,000,000.</p>
					<p>1875 to £8,500,000,000.</p>
					<p>As an instance of the squandering of means of production and of products during a crisis, the total loss in the German iron industry alone, in the crisis of 1873⁠–⁠78, was given at the second German Industrial Congress (Berlin, February 21, 1878) as £22,750,000.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="socialism.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To this very day the idea is prevalent among savages and barbarians that the human forms appearing in our dreams are souls which temporarily leave the body, and that, therefore, the real man becomes liable for the deeds done to the dreamer by his dream appearance. So Imthurm, for example, found it in 1884 among the Indians in Guiana.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="feuerbach.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is incumbent upon me to make a personal explanation at this place. People have lately referred to my share in this theory, and so I can hardly refrain from saying a few words here in settlement of that particular matter. I cannot deny that I had before and during my forty years’ collaboration with Marx a certain independent share not only in laying out the foundations, but more particularly in working out the theory. But the greatest part of the leading essential thinking, particularly in the realm of economics, and especially its final sharp statement, belongs to Marx alone. What I contributed Marx could quite readily have carried out without me with the exception of a pair of special applications. What Marx supplied, I could not have readily brought. Marx stood higher, saw further, took a wider, clearer, quicker survey than all of us. Marx was a genius, we others, at the best, talented. Without him the theory would not be what it is today, by a long way. It therefore rightly bears his name.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="feuerbach.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Not to be confused with the Schöffen courts after the manner of Bismarck and <span epub:type="z3998:surname">Leonhardt</span>, in which lawyers and lay assessors combined find verdict and judgment. In the old judicial courts there were no lawyers at all, the presiding judge had no vote at at all, and the Schöffen or lay assessors gave the verdict independently.</p>
					<p>
						<a href="the-mark.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
